#### Using the OpenSSL application

*   Why do I get a "PRNG not seeded" error message?

    Cryptographic software needs a source of unpredictable data to work
    correctly.  Many open source operating systems provide a "randomness
    device" (/dev/urandom or /dev/random) that serves this purpose.
    All OpenSSL versions try to use /dev/urandom by default; starting with
    version 0.9.7, OpenSSL also tries /dev/random if /dev/urandom is not
    available.

    On other systems, applications have to call the RAND_add(3) or
    RAND_seed(3) function with appropriate data before generating keys or
    performing public key encryption. (These functions initialize the
    pseudo-random number generator, PRNG.)  Some broken applications do
    not do this.  As of version 0.9.5, the OpenSSL functions that need
    randomness report an error if the random number generator has not been
    seeded with at least 128 bits of randomness.  If this error occurs and
    is not discussed in the documentation of the application you are
    using, please contact the author of that application; it is likely
    that it never worked correctly.  OpenSSL 0.9.5 and later make the
    error visible by refusing to perform potentially insecure encryption.

    On systems without /dev/urandom and /dev/random, it is a good idea to
    use the Entropy Gathering Demon (EGD); see the RAND_egd(3) manpage for
    details.  Starting with version 0.9.7, OpenSSL will automatically look
    for an EGD socket at /var/run/egd-pool, /dev/egd-pool, /etc/egd-pool and
    /etc/entropy.

    Most components of the openssl command line utility automatically try
    to seed the random number generator from a file.  The name of the
    default seeding file is determined as follows: If environment variable
    RANDFILE is set, then it names the seeding file.  Otherwise if
    environment variable HOME is set, then the seeding file is $HOME/.rnd.
    If neither RANDFILE nor HOME is set, versions up to OpenSSL 0.9.6 will
    use file .rnd in the current directory while OpenSSL 0.9.6a uses no
    default seeding file at all.  OpenSSL 0.9.6b and later will behave
    similarly to 0.9.6a, but will use a default of "C:\" for HOME on
    Windows systems if the environment variable has not been set.

    If the default seeding file does not exist or is too short, the "PRNG
    not seeded" error message may occur.

    The openssl command line utility will write back a new state to the
    default seeding file (and create this file if necessary) unless
    there was no sufficient seeding.

    Pointing $RANDFILE to an Entropy Gathering Daemon socket does not work.
    Use the "-rand" option of the OpenSSL command line tools instead.
    The $RANDFILE environment variable and $HOME/.rnd are only used by the
    OpenSSL command line tools. Applications using the OpenSSL library
    provide their own configuration options to specify the entropy source,
    please check out the documentation coming the with application.

*   Why do I get an "unable to write 'random state'" error message?

    Sometimes the openssl command line utility does not abort with
    a "PRNG not seeded" error message, but complains that it is
    "unable to write 'random state'".  This message refers to the
    default seeding file (see previous answer).  A possible reason
    is that no default filename is known because neither RANDFILE
    nor HOME is set.  (Versions up to 0.9.6 used file ".rnd" in the
    current directory in this case, but this has changed with 0.9.6a.)

*   Why do I get errors when trying to decrypt 1.0.2 data with 1.1.0?

    A message digest is used to create the encrypt/decrypt key from
    a human-entered passphrase.  In OpenSSL 1.1.0 we changed from MD5 to
    SHA-256.  We did this as part of an overall change to move away from
    the now-insecure and broken MD5 algorithm.  If you have old files,
    use the "-md md5" flag to decrypt them.

*   How do I create certificates or certificate requests?

    Check out the CA.pl(1) manual page. This provides a simple wrapper round
    the 'req', 'verify', 'ca' and 'pkcs12' utilities. For finer control check
    out the manual pages for the individual utilities and the certificate
    extensions documentation (in ca(1), req(1), and x509v3_config(5) ).

*   Why can't I create certificate requests?

    You typically get the error:

        unable to find 'distinguished_name' in config
        problems making Certificate Request

    This is because it can't find the configuration file. Check out the
    DIAGNOSTICS section of req(1) for more information.

*   Why does &lt;SSL program&gt; fail with a certificate verify error?

    This problem is usually indicated by log messages saying something like
    "unable to get local issuer certificate" or "self signed certificate".
    When a certificate is verified its root CA must be "trusted" by OpenSSL
    this typically means that the CA certificate must be placed in a directory
    or file and the relevant program configured to read it. The OpenSSL program
    'verify' behaves in a similar way and issues similar error messages: check
    the verify(1) program manual page for more information.

*   How can I create DSA certificates?

    Check the CA.pl(1) manual page for a DSA certificate example.

*   Why can't I make an SSL connection to a server using a DSA certificate?

    Typically you'll see a message saying there are no shared ciphers when
    the same setup works fine with an RSA certificate. There are two possible
    causes. The client may not support connections to DSA servers most web
    browsers (including Netscape and MSIE) only support connections to servers
    supporting RSA cipher suites. The other cause is that a set of DH parameters
    has not been supplied to the server. DH parameters can be created with the
    dhparam(1) command and loaded using the SSL_CTX_set_tmp_dh(3) for example:
    check the source to s_server in apps/s_server.c for an example.

*   How can I remove the passphrase on a private key?

    Firstly you should be really *really* sure you want to do this. Leaving
    a private key unencrypted is a major security risk. If you decide that
    you do have to do this check the EXAMPLES sections of the rsa(1) and
    dsa(1) manual pages.

*   Why can't I use OpenSSL certificates with SSL client authentication?

    What will typically happen is that when a server requests authentication
    it will either not include your certificate or tell you that you have
    no client certificates (Netscape) or present you with an empty list box
    (MSIE). The reason for this is that when a server requests a client
    certificate it includes a list of CAs names which it will accept. Browsers
    will only let you select certificates from the list on the grounds that
    there is little point presenting a certificate which the server will
    reject.

    The solution is to add the relevant CA certificate to your servers "trusted
    CA list". How you do this depends on the server software in uses. You can
    print out the servers list of acceptable CAs using the OpenSSL s_client tool:

        openssl s_client -connect www.some.host:443 -prexit

    If your server only requests certificates on certain URLs then you may need
    to manually issue an HTTP GET command to get the list when s_client connects:

        GET /some/page/needing/a/certificate.html

    If your CA does not appear in the list then this confirms the problem.

*   Why does my browser give a warning about a mismatched hostname?

    Browsers expect the server's hostname to match the value in the commonName
    (CN) field of the certificate. If it does not then you get a warning.

*   How do I install a CA certificate into a browser?

    The usual way is to send the DER encoded certificate to the browser as
    MIME type application/x-x509-ca-cert, for example by clicking on an
    appropriate link. On MSIE certain extensions such as .der or .cacert
    may also work, or you can import the certificate using the
    certificate import wizard.

    You can convert a certificate to DER form using the command:

        openssl x509 -in ca.pem -outform DER -out ca.der

    Occasionally someone suggests using a command such as:

        openssl pkcs12 -export -out cacert.p12 -in cacert.pem -inkey cakey.pem

    DO NOT DO THIS! This command will give away your CAs private key and
    reduces its security to zero: allowing anyone to forge certificates in
    whatever name they choose.

*   Why is OpenSSL x509 DN output not conformant to RFC2253?

    The ways to print out the oneline format of the DN (Distinguished Name) have
    been extended in version 0.9.7 of OpenSSL. Using the new X509_NAME_print_ex(3)
    interface, the "-nameopt" option could be introduced. See the manual
    page of the "openssl x509" command line tool for details. The old behaviour
    has however been left as default for the sake of compatibility.

*   Why does OpenSSL set the authority key identifier (AKID) extension
    incorrectly?

    It doesn't: this extension is often the cause of confusion.

    Consider a certificate chain A->B->C so that A signs B and B signs
    C. Suppose certificate C contains AKID.

    The purpose of this extension is to identify the authority
    certificate B. This can be done either by including the subject key
    identifier of B or its issuer name and serial number.

    In this latter case because it is identifying certificate B it must
    contain the issuer name and serial number of B.

    It is often wrongly assumed that it should contain the subject name
    of B. If it did this would be redundant information because it would
    duplicate the issuer name of C.

*   How can I set up a bundle of commercial root CA certificates?

    The OpenSSL software is shipped without any root CA certificate as the
    OpenSSL project does not have any policy on including or excluding
    any specific CA and does not intend to set up such a policy. Deciding
    about which CAs to support is up to application developers or
    administrators.

    Other projects do have other policies so you can for example extract the CA
    bundle used by Mozilla and/or modssl as described in this article:
    https://www.mail-archive.com/modssl-users@modssl.org/msg16980.html

*   Some secure servers 'hang' with OpenSSL 1.0.1, is this a bug?

    OpenSSL 1.0.1 is the first release to support TLS 1.2, among other things,
    this increases the size of the default ClientHello message to more than
    255 bytes in length. Some software cannot handle this and hangs.

*   Some secure servers emit an infinite loop of HTTP headers with an OpenSSL
    1.1.0 client, is this a bug?

    OpenSSL 1.1.0 introduced support for several new TLS extensions, including
    encrypt-then-mac and extended-master-secret, both of which provide
    significant security improvements.  Unfortunately, some deployed TLS
    servers are severely broken and do not implement extensibility in a
    standards-compliant manner; these servers may exhibit strange behavior
    such as repeating the HTTP headers in a loop after receiving a ClientHello
    that includes such TLS extensions unknown to them.  While these new TLS
    extensions provide significant security benefits to clients and are
    accordingly enabled by default in modern TLS clients, if bringing the
    server into compliance is not possible, the extension(s) in question can
    be disabled on a per-connection basis when talking to the buggy server, by
    using SSL_set_options(3).
